Nine-year-old Kayon Hicks was blissfully skipping rope with a telephone wire on a Harlem sidewalk the other day and giggling with her friends. But when she walked into Gallery M she was in a different world. Here, she said, she feels like a queen among the queens she sees in the art on the walls.
Jazz music played as she twirled a white lace parasol and quietly studied the figures, from strong African women to hopeful little girls like herself.
''I love this place,'' she said. ''It has a lot of joy.''
Gallery M is opening the door to a wide world of art for Kayon and other neighborhood children who have adopted it as a hangout. The small gallery, at 123 West 135th Street, around the corner from the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, showcases works by artists who are or have been homeless as well as by mainstream artists and children.
''I really love to see the kids so excited about art,'' said the gallery manager, Edie Lynch. ''They've been coming in here and doing their homework after school or visiting on the weekends, and I've been helping them draw pictures of their own.''
The four-year-old gallery, run by Weston United Community Renewal Inc., was originally founded to exhibit the art made by people in the group's residences for the homeless and in rehabilitation centers. It started including pieces by mainstream artists and even a neighborhood child with its most recent exhibition, which runs through July 15.
The gallery was host to a tea party fund-raiser on Saturday to help buy Kayon a $150 artwork she has been longing for, ''Little Girl Looking Out a Heart-Shaped Moon,'' a shadow box by Jimmie Smith, a professional artist. Kayon and her sister, LaKeshia, 10, have been doing chores like polishing display cases at the gallery to earn money to put the piece up in their bedroom.
''The girls were never really interested in art before, so it's nice to know they're going into the gallery and learning,'' said Sheila Hicks, their mother.
The mixed-media shadow box is one of a series Mr. Smith made featuring his girlfriend's 10-year-old daughter, Jaycee, looking out a window at fantastic scenes that are in stark contrast to the real view outside her window: a junkyard.
Mr. Smith's works are a hit with the children who visit Gallery M, as are the gallery's baskets of jazz CD's and children's books. Other popular items include watercolor portraits by 10-year-old Danielle West, who lives nearby.
''This little girl just came knocking on our door one rainy day before our exhibit opening,'' Ms. Lynch said. ''And she said: 'Please let me in. I'm an artist.'
''We saw her portraits, and she was good. So we included her in the show.''
The children also enjoy works in the gallery like the striking oil paintings of slave women in the series ''Endurance of the Spirit Women'' by Lloyd Stevens, an art director for The New York Times; portraits of entertainers by James Jenkins, who is living in one of the Weston United residences, and jewelry by Gennady Osmerkin.
Herb Boyd, who took his history of Harlem class from the College of New Rochelle to the studio on a neighborhood tour, said he was happy to witness the children's delight.
Mr. Boyd said that although the gallery is fairly new, the children's interest in it shows it is an asset to the community.
''It's great to see the kids in here, because the kids will grow with the gallery,'' he said. ''They will come to value and understand the importance of art. And when they're older, they will do their best to promote and preserve art.''
