At least no one can say there was no warning. Last November, in the first part of an award-winning series on corporate tax benefits by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele, Time Magazine published a related article  about various tax benefits that were granted to its parent corporation, Time Warner Inc. The article, detailing tax breaks worth about $2.4 million, ran under the headline ''We Play the Game Too.''
And play it and play it. New York City's Government last week gave Time Warner its second windfall of the year. This one was worth $28 million and specifically benefits the company's publishing division, which is expanding and renovating its offices on the Avenue of the Americas between West 50th and 51st Streets. Earlier this year, City Hall granted an $11 million tax break to HBO, another Time Warner division, when it said it would renew its lease at West 42d Street and the Avenue of the Americas.
Mr. Steele does not seem to be raising eyebrows at the deal. Asked about the practice-what-you-preach aspects of the situation, he said, ''The point we made in the series was that, as long as governments are making these available, corporations will seek them. Until an overall policy exists, in which one state can't raid another's jobs or one city can't raid another, this is going to go on.''
He added that The most important thing a media corporation has to do is ''at least write about these things.''
The magazine's managing editor, Walter Isaacson, said, ''I think corporate welfare is silly in all its guises.'' He added: ''We write about the corporation. We don't speak for the corporation.''
Peter Costiglio, who does speak for Time Inc., said of the tax breaks, ''The executives who run the company try always to act in the best interest of the company -- this would be a case of that.''
A number of other media companies have received tax benefits in the city in recent years, including The New York Times Company, the News Corporation, Bertelsmann A.G., Viacom Inc. and NBC.
FELICITY BARRINGER
