The Southern charm of Savannah, Ga., -- a crucial character in the best seller ''Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil'' -- has seduced a New York publisher once again. St. Martin's Press is paying a six-figure advance for a previously published first novel set in the balmy coastal city by a native son who tirelessly promoted his work with Rotary Club appearances and articles in ''Podiatry Today.''
William C. Harris Jr., a podiatrist for almost 25 years and the son of a former sheriff of Chatham County, Ga., is the first to acknowledge that the early success for ''Delirium of the Brave'' comes on the pages of a perennial best seller known simply in Savannah as The Book.
''I don't think that there's any denying that 'Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil' has put such a spotlight on Savannah and that because of that any book of this caliber would stir up some interest,'' said Mr. Harris, 52, in a telephone interview from his medical office in Savannah.
Delirium, which was originally published by a small Savannah publisher, Frederic C. Beil, is a Southern saga that follows four generations of an Irish-Catholic family and a black family through their clashes with the Chatham County power brokers.
Like John Berendt's ''Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil,'' the plot pivots on a murder of a homosexual -- in this case a serial killer who distributes body parts in brown paper bags.
But while Midnight was a nonfiction work that stretched the facts in fictional ways, Delirium is billed as fiction with firm roots in factual events, including the crimes of a paper bag murderer who was captured in the 1940's.
Since the book was published last fall, the title has sold more than 5,000 copies locally, which eventually attracted the interest of an agent and large publishers who bid for the book in an auction last month.
Mr. Harris's new literary agent, Nancy Stauffer, said the writer himself could be a Flannery O'Connor character. At the age of 19, Mr. Harris stepped on a downed power line, and his legs had to be amputated.
As part of the deal with St. Martin's, which is owned by Holtzbrinck G.m.b.H., Mr. Harris is planning on writing a sequel to Delirium.
But for the foreseeable future his shingle will stay up in Savannah while the fiction takes shape at night.
''I ain't quitting my day job real soon,'' joked Mr. Harris. ''But who knows.''
DOREEN CARVAJAL
