EVENTS
Footwork
With costumes and set by the author and artist Maurice Sendak, the Pilobolus Dance Theater returns to the Joyce Theater tonight to introduce ''A Selection,'' a darkly theatrical work for the company's six performers. Its narrative, created in part by Mr. Sendak, tells of a troupe of performers who miss the last available train out of Nazi Germany. Dedicated to Primo Levi, the Italian scientist and author, who survived Auschwitz, the work is set to music by the Czech composers Hans Krasa and Pavel Haas, both of whom died in concentration camps. Along with the playful trio ''Un, Dos, Tray'' and the solo ''Femme Noire,'' ''A Selection'' is one of three New York premieres among 13 dances spanning 25 years to be presented by Pilobolus in its engagement through July 31. Information: (212) 242-0800.
In Harmony
Some 250 musicians from 32 countries will gather on Saturday in Sapporo, Japan, for the opening of the 10th Pacific Music Festival. Founded in 1990 by Leonard Bernstein, who envisioned a Tanglewood of the Far East, the festival is under the artistic direction of Michael Tilson Thomas, with a faculty of leading members of the Vienna Philharmonic and other major orchestras. This 25-day event consists of orchestral, chamber music, voice and keyboard programs, as well as concerts and recitals for young musicians chosen from auditions in 30 cities worldwide. Information: 011-81-11-520-2222.
Through a Lens
Photographers documenting the United States under the New Deal and the Soviet Union under Communism in the 1930's are the subject of an exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington. ''Propaganda and Dreams: Photographing in the 1930's in the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.,'' running through Oct. 3, is built around more than 200 photographs for the Farm Security Administration by Americans including Walker Evans and Dorothea Lange and for official publications and Government-sponsored archives by Russians like Max Alpert and Aleksandr Rodchenko. Information: (202) 639-1700.
On the Square
An all-Mendelssohn program led by Henry Schuman and featuring the ''Italian'' Symphony, ''Fingal's Cave'' Overture and the Violin Concerto with Ole Bohn as soloist opens the 41st season of the Washington Square Music Festival at 8 P.M. tomorrow in the southeast quadrant of Washington Square Park. The free concerts continue with a Beethoven and Vivaldi program on July 13 and conclude with ''Swing Band Jazz'' on July 27. In the event of rain, the concerts move to New York University's Frederick Loewe Theater at 35 West Fourth Street. Information: (212) 431-1088.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER
