Four disappointed bidders were prepared to spend more than $24 million on a Degas pastel at Sotheby's here last week in a telling sign about today's art market: there is plenty of money to be spent but not enough great works to spend it on. During last week's back-to-back auctions of Impressionist, contemporary and modern art, high prices were consistently paid. In some cases the prices were well deserved.
The Degas, ''Dancer in Repose,'' an 1879 image of a dancer sitting on a bench massaging her foot, was one of the week's exceptional works. It had not been for sale for 104 years and had never been exhibited outside France. The pastel, which was expected to sell for $8 million, broke all records for Degas, selling to an unidentified telephone bidder for $27.9 million, more than three times its estimate.
A staggering price was not altogether unexpected. Not only is ''Dancer in Repose'' a beautiful image with vibrant colors, but it also has an impeccable provenance. Jules-Emile Boivin, a French businessman, acquired it from Durand-Ruel, the first great Impressionist dealer in Paris, in 1885  and it had remained in the Boivin family, which was now selling it.
Offers for the work rose in astonishing  increments of $800,000. In addition to four tenacious telephone bidders, David Nash, a private New York dealer, was bidding in the salesroom, presumably for his client Paul Allen, one of the founders of Microsoft. Mr. Nash dropped out at $25.6 million.
As soon as Melanie Clore, Sotheby's deputy chairman in Europe, took the winning bid, whispering spectators began speculating who the buyer could be. Was it the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles? Its board was traveling in England at the time of the sale and could have viewed the pastel. But if it was the winner, the museum was not ready to declare itself so.
Or could it have been Stephen A. Wynn, the Las Vegas casino owner who has spent millions of dollars putting together a mini-museum at Bellagio, one of his newest casino hotels? Reached by telephone, Mr. Wynn said he was not the buyer. ''Some people from Sotheby's stopped by and showed the Degas to me,'' he said. ''We put it next to the one I already have, which is just as good. I don't know who bought it, but they got a first-rate picture.''
Because both Sotheby's and Christie's offer such shop-at-home service (months before the sale, auction house experts travel around the world with their top works so collectors can see them without having to come to London) the salesrooms were not as packed with Americans as they had been in recent years. But Americans accounted for a good deal of the week's total sales and for the active telephone bidding.
Still, more than 1,000 people from about a dozen countries crowded the Bond Street salesroom of Sotheby's on the night of its Impressionist and modern art sale. They were not disappointed in the theatrics of it all.  When a Matisse, ''Yellow Dress and Multicolored Dress (Nezy and Lydia),'' a colorful painting from 1940,  came on the block, a gray-haired man who wore dark glasses and whose accent was unmistakably American thrust his hand in the air to proclaim his intention to bid and  finally bought the painting for $11.3 million, more than two times the $4.8 million high estimate.
Instantly nicknamed ''Shades'' by people in the audience, he left the salesroom right after he bought the painting, trailed by reporters trying unsuccessfully to find out his name.  Sotheby's officials let him slip out a side door.
Such wild bidding, which has not  been seen at sales in New York or London since the heady days of the 1980's, left the audience applauding. Many people there said the buyer was a Hollywood producer, but nobody knew exactly who he was. Experts were astonished by the high price, noting that while decorative,  the work is hardly considered one of the artist's best.
Another Degas pastel, also being sold by the Boivin family, ''Woman Sitting in Front of a Piano'' (1882-1885), was also expected to fetch a high price. Three dealers tried to buy it: Mr. Nash and two London dealers, Thomas Gibson and Joe Nahmad.  But none were willing to pay much more than its $4 million low estimate. Mr. Nash bought the pastel for $4.8 million, presumably on behalf of Mr. Allen.
(All prices include the auction house's commission, 15 percent of the first $50,000 and 10 percent of the rest. Estimates do not reflect commissions.)
For the first time in years dealers were seen buying works for their inventory, an indication that in some cases they considered the prices reasonable enough to make a profit on resale. It was also a sign of the scarcity of works on the market.
''A lot of pictures which 12 months ago were the soft underbelly of the market were not simply sold, but for high prices, indicating the general strength of things,'' said James Roundell, a London dealer.
Desmond Corcoran, a London dealer, paid a record price for a Juan Gris at Christie's sale of 20th-century art on Wednesday night. The Cubist still life, ''Cup, Glass and Bottle (The Newspaper),'' painted in 1914  shortly before the outbreak of World War I, is a collage painting combining real bits of newspaper with a trompe l'oeil rendering of a wine bottle and coffee cup. It had been estimated to bring $1.5 million to $1.9 million. Five bidders tried to take the painting home. Mr. Corcoran won,  paying $4.8 million.
Other high prices were recorded at that sale, too. Francis Bacon's ''Three Studies for a Self-Portrait'' from 1976 was estimated to sell for $1.3 million to $1.9 million. It was bought for $2.9 million by a telephone bidder identified by Christie's officials only as an American collector. Five bidders at the same sale vied for Leger's ''Woman Holding a Book,'' which was bought by another unidentified American bidding by telephone. Estimated to fetch $810,000 to $1.1 million, it sold for $2.9 million.
Earlier that day collectors ignored Christie's estimates completely and paid top dollar at a sale of works by the Catalan-born sculptor Julio Gonzalez. The collection was being sold by the Hartung Foundation, created in 1994 shortly after the death of Hans Hartung, a German-born artist who lived in Paris and who was married to Gonzalez's daughter, Roberta. Included in the sale were more than 18 sculptures and 60 drawings by Gonzalez, who is widely credited with inspiring Picasso, David Smith and Calder in the tradition of welded metal sculpture.
Gonzalez's slim sculptures often consist of iron rods connected by arcs of metal in human shapes. Most offered for sale are bronze casts produced posthumously in 1952, so when an original hand-forged piece by him is available it is considered an art world event.
In the packed salesroom, collectors were willing to spend 10 times the estimates for the choicest Gonzaelz pieces. ''Head of a Woman II'' from 1931, a masklike sculpture that was estimated to bring $300,000 to $360,000 set a world record for the artist's work, selling to an unidentified telephone bidder for $3.2 million.  ''Gothic Man,'' an abstract sculpture of geometric forms conceived in 1937, also sold for more than 10 times its high estimate, going for $2.9 million from an unidentified European collector. From the same year,  ''Rigid Shape (Very Fine Shape),'' an elegant, abstract construction, was bought by another unidentified American collector for $958,270, more than five times its $190,000 high estimate. The entire sale totaled  $14.5 million, more than four times its $3.2 million high estimate.
''People realized this was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity,'' said Franck Giraud, head of Christie's 19th-  and 20th-century art departments worldwide. ''As confidence built throughout the sale, what was thought to be a predictable success reached a level that no one could ever have anticipated.''
