Stalin has issued the order to arrest and execute the most prominent Jewish writers in the Soviet Union. Through a clerical error, one of the 27 men arrested is an unknown, unpublished writer named Pinchas Pelovits. In the tragicomic fable ''The 27th Man,'' the forlorn Pinchas -- a Zelig among the immortals -- writes a story that the other captives applaud. Facing death, he finally finds an audience.
With its folkloric atmosphere and its mordant humor, ''The 27th Man'' could have been written by I. B. Singer or, were it not for the era in which it takes place, by Gogol. It is actually the work of a 29-year-old American, Nathan Englander, and appears in his first book, ''For the Relief of Unbearable Urges.''
The book, published by Alfred A. Knopf, is a collection of nine stories about Orthodox Jews in extreme circumstances -- in the Soviet Union, Israel and Brooklyn. The characters face and sometimes overcome spiritual, moral and sexual crises.
In another story, ''The Tumblers,'' a group of Polish Jews from the legendary town of Chelm are deported to Auschwitz during World War II and accidentally get on the wrong train. They save their lives by joining a troupe of traveling gymnasts and quickly mastering the art of acrobatics. In ''Reb Kringle,'' an Orthodox Jew who works as a department store Santa Claus finally comes to terms with his unorthodox predicament.
In a Kafkaesque moment, a Protestant New Yorker riding in a taxicab suddenly undergoes a magical conversion: he becomes Jewish. And in the title story, a man in Tel Aviv whose wife no longer wants to have sexual relations with him goes to his rabbi, who, as special dispensation, gives him a prescription to visit a prostitute.
Recently published, the collection has received glowing reviews. In The New York Times Book Review, James E. Young characterized it as ''a revelation of the human condition.'' One of the surprising things is that the work, so seemingly esoteric, is also proving to be popular with a wide audience. It has already gone into its sixth printing.
Mr. Englander is amazed by the reaction. As he said in a recent luncheon interview at the Union Square Cafe, ''It's as if I've done something sly by writing literary short stories about Hasidim.'' When people approach him about buying the movie rights, he feels as if he is walking in a dream: ''It's a master case of the impostor complex. I might wake up and be asked to go home.''
For the book, he received an advance that was somewhat less than the reported $350,000 but still high for a collection of stories. That was Mr. Englander's first surprise. He said, ''I would have been happy if Knopf had just given me a complete set of Everyman's library,'' adding a stipulation, ''if they could have shipped it to Jerusalem.''
Mr. Englander, who grew up in West Hempstead on Long Island, now lives in Jerusalem, and in that is one of the many paradoxes of his life. It was in Israel that he became a secular Jew, or, as he also describes himself, ''a God-fearing atheist.''
Born into an Orthodox Jewish family in an Orthodox Jewish community, he studied at a yeshiva through his high school years and observed all religious rules and traditions. He wore a yarmulke, and his hair was short though with long sideburns. Everybody he knew was Orthodox: ''I played on Orthodox baseball and basketball teams.''
In almost all respects, he was the perfect picture of the yeshiva boy. ''I was a believer,'' he said. ''I was a little zealot. I would have been terrified to walk through the doors of a public school.'' But he had theological questions, and they remained unanswered.
After school, he watched television for hours every day. For him, television provided an alternative and seemingly unattainable reality. Except for that, and for one yeshiva teacher who introduced him to Camus and Freud and encouraged his early attempts at writing, his life was isolated and rarefied.
During summers he commuted to Manhattan, where he worked for a relative who was involved in arbitrage. It was expected that he would continue his Orthodox education and then become a stockbroker. Instead, at his insistence, he entered the State University of New York at Binghamton for a liberal arts education.
In his junior year he went to Israel, his first trip outside the United States, and he was transformed by the experience. Encountering secular Jews in Israel was a cultural shock. That year he forsook his religious training, removed his yarmulke and let his hair grow. Striking-looking with deeply set dark eyes, he now has wild black locks: he could be a portrait subject for Edward Burne-Jones.
Immersing himself in literature and in the world around him, he  started to discover himself a writer. He took Orthodox Jews as his subject, approaching them from his new perspective with skepticism as well as a degree of lingering sympathy.
At 22, he wrote the first version of ''The 27th Man.'' Although the story is fictional, it has a basis in that ''Stalin executed 26 Yiddishists in the summer of 1952,'' he said. There is confusion over the event: in some accounts, the writers were shot, in others they were hung. ''I saw this terrible romantic irony that all the writers were executed without their last story being told. I felt that somebody should write them a story.''
Finishing it, he showed it to a friend's mother, who was a children's book editor, and she became his private editor, guiding him through successive rewrites, which he did over five years. She also prodded him to go to graduate school. Reluctantly he applied to the University of Iowa's Writers Workshop. He was admitted and plunged into writing fiction.
'I Fell in Love With Jerusalem'
One day he drove Lois Rosenthal, the editor of Story magazine, to the airport, and she asked if he had any stories to show her. He had three with him, ''For the Relief of Unbearable Urges,'' ''Reb Kringle'' and ''The 27th Man.'' All were published in Story, the first one in 1996, and he acquired an agent, Nicole Aragi, who just happened to be Arab.
Having been charmed by Jerusalem, Mr. Englander decided to move there. Admittedly, the choice was odd considering that he was no longer a religious Jew. Partly it was accidental. ''If I spoke Italian, I might be in Rome, but I fell in love with Jerusalem,'' he said. ''I've had a real education there,'' one that has been political as well as cultural. At one point, he began reading Gogol, who ranks high among his literary influences.
He writes six days a week. ''On the seventh day I rest,'' he said, explaining that for several years that day was Tuesday and now it is Friday. Generally he spends from six months to a year on a story, and with each one he tries to hold to the logic of the world he has created.
In the case of ''The Tumblers,'' he was careful to be historically accurate, except about the acrobatics. To avoid second-guessing from professionals, he invented his own moves, which have the sound of S. J. Perelman: Full Twisting Voltas, a Half Hanlon and a Soaring Angel.
Because his stories speak frankly about the Orthodox, he was fearful that there would be an adverse reaction when the book was published and he came back to the United States for a book tour. ''I assumed people would not even open the book and I would be vilified,'' he said. But so far he has encountered no such criticism, and Orthodox Jews, some from his hometown, have attended his readings in various cities.
After one reading, a friend from Long Island told him that he had a different perception of their childhood: ''He found the world -- our community, our school -- very nurturing.'' For Mr. Englander, it was restrictive and binding. And for him it was another paradox: ''I left this world and now, in a sense, I've gotten it back. At every reading I have different reunions with people.''
Within his religious family, he maintains his secularity and has found particular support from his mother, who reads the stories in various drafts and to whom the book is dedicated. Characterizing his fiction, he said: ''It's an exploration of people pushing against the boundaries of their world. For me, the book is about identity issues, about those boundaries,'' and about the bearing of unbearable urges. ''I think there are rights and wrongs in the world, but it's a lot more complicated now that I've given up on a very strict belief system.''
Worlds Beyond Orthodox Jewry
While still writing stories, Mr. Englander has also been working on a historical novel about Argentina. He spent several months there in 1991. ''A lot of elements fascinated me: there were Nazis, a military government, Jewish gauchos -- everything I could want, all the irony I need.'' Though Orthodox Judaism remains his literary preoccupation, he does not exclude the possibility that eventually he may diversify his subjects.
For the present, people still marvel at his emergence from such a cloistered environment with his imagination intact. ''They want to know how I could have left this community,'' he said. ''Wouldn't it be a miracle if everyone born into a world stayed in that world, if every Mormon stayed a Mormon. But people change and find themselves.''
Looking back on his childhood in West Hempstead, a special slice of suburbia, he said: ''I'm a fourth-generation American. I lived in a shtetl with strip malls around it. Everything was so forbidden. But when you know nothing else, it gets to be a real adventure to find another world.''
