For Richard N. Kaplan, the president of CNN/U.S.A. it has been, to say the least, an intense year of news, both on the air, where CNN covered a war and an impeachment, and off, where Mr. Kaplan faced a series of more personal challenges.
First came the fiasco known as ''Tailwind,'' a report about the alleged use of nerve gas by United States forces in Vietnam, which appeared on the initial edition of Mr. Kaplan's creation -- the news magazine series ''Newsstand.'' The ''Tailwind'' report was retracted one year ago this week, with an abject apology to the viewers.
Then the three-night-a-week ''Newsstand'' failed to soar in the ratings and its future became the subject of wide speculation both in and outside CNN.
Finally came the Lou Dobbs episode. In June, CNN lost the anchor of its big moneymaker, ''Moneyline News Hour,'' when Mr. Dobbs left for an Internet venture and article after article cited Mr. Dobbs's tense relations with Mr. Kaplan as a reason why.
Still, after the year of turmoil, Mr. Kaplan is still leading CNN and is readying a plan to revamp the ''Newsstand'' format in a plan he and Tom Johnson, the chairman of the network, are expected to present soon to Ted Turner, the CNN founder and now vice chairman of its parent company, Time Warner. ''I feel Rick has provided splendid leadership,'' Mr. Johnson said.
His critics inside CNN say Mr. Kaplan still has not come up with an overall plan to find answers to one of CNN's biggest continuing problems: generating ratings for CNN during slow news periods. But he is credited with making a number of significant improvements, including a total redesign of CNN's on-air look, consolidation of its news anchors to improve quality and the elimination of repeats in the hourly news cycle.
The changes initiated by Mr. Kaplan have included bringing in news anchors like Jeff Greenfield, Judd Rose, and Willow Bay, reducing the number of daily anchors from 26 to 12, building separate staff for each of the day's hour-long news segments, and increasing the number of special reports turned out by the network.
''We made steady progress every week on all sorts of little things,'' Mr. Kaplan said.
But it was the big things that got most of the notice. Mr. Dobbs was one of the most important figures at CNN, not only because he was the president of its financial news network, CNNfn, but because ''Moneyline'' brought in the biggest per-commercial price of any show on CNN.
Mr. Dobbs declined to tie his departure directly to his differences with Mr. Kaplan. But Mr. Kaplan acknowledged that ''there was tension'' between him and Mr. Dobbs. ''We were clearly different people,'' he said.
Mr. Johnson said he had been thrust into the middle of the dispute between the two men, which he called ''a clash of two dynamic personalities.''
The main area of disagreement, Mr. Johnson said, was Mr. Dobbs's conviction that Mr. Kaplan's ''Newsstand'' franchise was sucking up financial resources that could have been going to CNNfn. ''Lou really believed that,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''But he was mistaken.''
Mr. Kaplan said money allocated to ''Newsstand'' was in a totally separate budget that was never available to CNNfn, a point supported by Mr. Johnson.
But the focus on resources being directed toward ''Newsstand'' only underscored what one CNN executive, speaking on the condition of anonymity, called ''the little secret'' inside the network: That ''Newsstand'' has not performed up to expectations.
''It's a bit of a politically sensitive subject at CNN,'' the executive said. ''Nobody has said much about it. It's a little like criticism in the Kremlin. The one person who criticized it was Lou Dobbs. But the show has really had zero impact, and it has been losing millions.''
Ratings for the series have certainly been low, and they got even worse when Mr. Kaplan decided to move the program from a starting time of 10 P.M. to 8 P.M. But he argued that an audience for any show in television ''takes time to build.'' He said, ''It's about continuity.''
When he created the three weekly edition of ''Newsstand,'' Mr. Kaplan was taking advantage of the associations with magazines also owned by Time Warner. The shows are produced in conjunction with Time, Fortune and Entertainment Weekly. Mr. Kaplan said he was attempting to create ''appointment shows'' for the network.
That had become a priority for CNN because the network's ratings -- and profits -- tend to rise and fall with the tides of breaking news. During big stories, the network does well; in slow news periods, it struggles. Now that CNN has competition from both MSNBC and Fox News, it is even more important to generate more dependable ratings.
Mr. Johnson said CNN prized its reputation as the breaking news network. ''But I am not content simply being the breaking news network,'' he said. ''I really want us to have other shows that people come to us for that are still within the news category.''
But both executives conceded that it was possible that viewers have such built-in expectations that CNN will be reporting on the news every hour that a pre-produced news magazine may not be what they are looking for. ''Viewers tuning in to see Kosovo may not want to run into 'Entertainment Weekly,' '' Mr. Kaplan said.
Neither Mr. Kaplan and Mr. Johnson would say specifically what changes they have in mind for the series. Mr. Johnson would only say, ''We may be looking at doing segments of these shows inside other news shows.''
But Mr. Kaplan disputed the charge that 'Newsstand'' has been an unusually expensive project to mount. He said that the three editions of ''Newsstand'' cost less than a single edition of any news magazine program on a broadcast network.
That is an area Mr. Kaplan is intimately familiar with because he was the original executive producer on ABC's ''Prime Time Live.'' He also served as executive producer on both ''Nightline'' and ''World News Tonight'' for ABC, winning more than 30 Emmy Awards during his tenure at ABC.
Those are the credentials that induced Mr. Johnson to recruit Mr. Kaplan so aggressively. He said he had worked on bringing Mr. Kaplan to CNN for more than two years before he finally agreed to join the network in August 1997.
But in the aftermath of the ''Tailwind'' report on the very first edition of ''Newsstand,'' some CNN staff members seriously debated Mr. Kaplan's future at the network.
Mr. Johnson defended Mr. Kaplan then and he continues to now. He said that while the ''Tailwind'' incident ''hurt badly,'' it ''hurt all of us,'' and not merely Mr. Kaplan.
''Most of the people who worked on that report were at CNN long before Rick arrived,'' Mr. Johnson said. He added that he believed the network was now past the fallout from the incident, and cited a recent poll that showed 70 percent of the public saying they trusted CNN.
Mr. Johnson said he continued to trust Mr. Kaplan. ''We are a much stronger channel journalistically now,'' Mr. Johnson said. And, as if to tamp down any doubt that might remain, Mr. Johnson added the endorsement of the vice chairman and chairman of Time Warner for good measure: ''Ted Turner and Gerry Levin feel the same way.''
